# The process of analyzing the raw genomics data

The general process of finding a pattern in a genomics data illustrate as follow in seven steps.

1. Before assembling the sequence, the quality of data should be controlled in two following steps. To qualify the data, FASTQ format, which is a text-format for storing biological sequence information as well as quality scores, applies to the FASTQC program to generate a graphical report. An ASCII code encodes the quality score of data. In this format which has four lines commonly, fourth line indicates the quality of the sequence that illustrated in the second line of FASTQ format. FASTQC imports data from different formats including SAM, BAM and FASTQ and provides a QC report via graphs together with tables to evaluate the input data. Finally, an HTML file exports the results.

    SAM and BAM format files are abbreviations of Sequence Alignment Map and Binary Alignment Map, respectively. SAM is a text format file that carry different information about the sequence reads such as their quality and their place that map to the reference genome. BAM format is the binary type of the SAM.

2. Since assembly algorithms generally divide to two major methods including de novo and mapping, in the second step, the input parameter of graph-based type of de novo initialized. The reason why de novo is using instead of mapping is that while the computational complexity of de novo is higher than mapping method, the specify of de novo is higher as well, due to comparing all the reads with the others to produce the assembly. On the other hand, the mapping method, reads are just aligned to a reference sequence to create a similar genome but not necessarily identical to an existing backbone sequence.

    Therefore, here de novo is used which have two common methods including greedy and graph-based. Greedy method has four principal steps and assembles the problem gradually. First the highest scoring overlap selects, and then the overlapped fragments merge and add to the pool of sequence. The final step, repeat the procedure from one to three until one fragment left. Graph-based method uses a graph structure to pre-process the sequence data and an input parameter called k is play an important role in the method. The initializing parameter called k is calculated for de Bruijn graph which is a graph for providing a k-size sequence in the special alphabet. In the pointed sequences, every possible n-size string on the alphabet exactly emerge once. In this graph, k points out the length of the sequence on the links that connect the graph. Thus, selecting the correct amount of k is very important in this algorithm which determines about the specificity and sensitivity. In the other words, the longer k-mers is chosen, the more specificity would be provided which reduces the depth of coverage as well.

    To select a suitable k which can satisfy both sides, three technical requirements should be met. First, k value must be odd. Second, the value must be smaller or equal to the maximum k-mer length which is available in the assembler and finally, it must be less than read lengths, rigorously.

    Now data is ready for assembly. SPAdes is a graph-based algorithm to assembly of Chlamydia trachomatis reads. SPAdes is an open source assembler software for single-cell and multicell assembly. Although this algorithm follows graph-based of de novo, it has a couple of extra steps as well such as correction of read errors and using multiple k-mer sizes for constructing a paired assembly graph from each constructed contig.

3. After assembling, the results of data need to be assessed as the third step. To do this, a statistic number called N50 is considered to evaluate the genome assembly. It is a weighted median statistic which its length is defined by the shortest sequence length of a set of contigs among 50% of genome. The reason why it is used as median statistic is that as the point of half of the mass of the distribution; the number of bases from all contigs longer than the N50 will be near the number of bases from all contigs shorter than the N50. The evaluation of the assembly needs more than just one assessment number, therefore Quality Assessment Tool for Genome Assemblies (QUAST) as another assessment tool is introduced by (Alexey Gurevich 2013).

4. Fourth step is annotation which Prokka software is applied to the assembled data for this step.

5. For the fifth step, short reads should be aligned and for this two methods are available including hash-table and Burrows-Wheeler Transform (BWT). Hash-table method is based on a method in computer science with the same name to improving the speed of search. Since the reads have duplicates mostly, hash table makes for short reads as well as genome and the scan of the hash table uses the un-hashed set of sequences. To find the exact placement of the reference genome Smith-Waterman algorithm (Pearson 1991).

    Additionally, Burrows-Wheeler Transform as the newer method is using a search method in an indexing data structure. BWT changes the order of genome data that multiple similar sequences put together, then the final index is generated to use for fast read placement on the genome. Although the gapped alignments cannot use this method, BWT is running faster than hash table based method around 30 times.

6. As the sixth step the number of reads among the generated alignments should be counted to assign to the feature of annotation of the aligned genome. The feature is an interval or a range of positions on a chromosome. In the case of RNA-Seq, the features are usually genes.

7. Ultimately, in the last step the gained data analysis via computational model which this part probes in the results section.